Any writing that comes out of the same society is going to have something in common.
Let me put it this way.
The first time I read Faulkner, never having been to the South and knowing nothing about it as an adolescent in Canada, I thought that Faulkner had the most wonderful imagination.
I thought of the Oxford, Mississippi or the county that he created as kind of land of Oz where all these
People did these wonderful, unreal things.
You're talking about my favorite author.
I know.
No, I thought he was wonderful.
But I didn't.
Then I met somebody from Oxford, Mississippi who said, honey, he didn't make anything up.
He just wrote it all down.
And that's what somebody from the South would understand, whereas I had to work at understanding that.
When you write about Canadians, did you say the same thing about myself?
You're not making anything up.
You're just writing it down.
Well, I am making things up.
Giving it your own little twist, of course.
I'm not making things up about the nature of the society, nor is he.
There's a wonderful book by John Kenneth Galbraith called The Scots.
And if you read that in connection with... It's not a book of economics.
It's a book about his childhood in a small town, much like Deptford, much like Robertson Davies' small town life.
And if you put that together with Roberts and Davies, and then with somebody like Alice Monroe, you'll see that there is a commonality.
It was funny in New York, because the New Yorkers, the Alabama people, it all made perfect sense for them because they knew small towns, but the New York people said,
Are there more crazy people and idiots in Canada than there are anywhere else?
And I said, look out the window.
I said, the difference is that in a big city, you don't know them personally.
Whereas in a small town, everybody knows everybody.
So that the idiot might be related to you.
Or the crazy person is your... Probably.
In fact, probably.
It's not maybe, probably.
Yes.
Anyway, you know not only their life history, but the life history of everybody else related to them.
And it's much closer and more personal.
Are you an angry woman, as John Irving has suggested?
Is that what you suggested?
Yeah, I read that in the Maclean's piece.
They quoted Irving as saying that you're an angry woman.
I suppose it depends what you mean by that.
I would have to save the context in which you said that because I know him and I've never given him any cause to believe that I'm angry with him.
I don't think that would be context.
No, I don't think so.
I think people ought to be angry about certain things.
And if they're not angry about those things, then there's something wrong with them.
How about that?
That's great.
But that doesn't mean that I'm personally angry about my own life, which would be very... I do not believe that.
That was the suggestion.
I think about things in a metaphysical sense, perhaps.
Bad behavior.
Yeah.
I'm angry about bad behavior.
Are you apprehensive at all about the response you might get from some feminist critics to this?
Feminists have all been little girls.
when either they have led completely isolated and charmed childhoods of little girls, or they will know where else I'd speak.
And also, nobody can have gone through the women's movement for the past 15 or 20 years without having seen grown-up examples of women forming alliances against other women.
But I think you're also saying something here that
I don't need to read this into it, but it's not a case of women always being morally correct.
It's not like women have a copyright on being... Women do not have a copyright on being morally correct, but nobody but the most complete idealist would always believe that they did.
Exactly.
I subscribe wholeheartedly to the fact that you have the courage to dramatize this in this novel.
Men are morally incorrect in more drastic ways.
I mean, men make wars.
through a lot more rape and murder than women do.
So they do have that sort of aggressive, violent aspect to them which cannot be denied either.
However, that does not mean that women are pure and thoughtward indeed, or are without the urge to power, which can be energizing and productive and steered in the right direction and can be destructive as much.
So let us just say that women are human beings, that their methods and areas of operation may be different, but that they are not without the ability to be destructive.
Would you call this a kind of a coming-of-age novel in a way?
You could call it many things.
You could call it a building for a mom.
That was the word I didn't want to use.
Well, since I studied the buildings in Vermont here in this very area, why not use it?
You could call it a portrait of the artist as a young woman.
There are many... Quite literally, actually.
Yes, there are many analogies that you could use.
You could call it... I don't know.
I mean, I leave it out to other people to call it.
That's my job again.
Yeah, I would call it.
It was kind of, I never read dust jacket verbs.
I still haven't.
They outrage me, as a matter of fact.
They really do.
I mean, so many of them give away the plot and tell me things about people dying who die on page 150 or something.
And I want to get that in its own.
And it's really a great way to read a book.
I'm sorry to go off like this.
pick up the book and just take it.
So I really stayed away from the reviews, and I still haven't read the Times review, but I will when I come to write or after I've written things.
But in any case, things surprised me, and particularly this view you give us of these young girls.
That really, I didn't expect that.
Did you have sisters?
I had two daughters.
How old are they now?
They are seven and six.
You haven't hit it yet.
And they're just angels.
Wait.
Wait for it.
Yeah.
And I've said, God, girls are the best.
I wanted sons.
Oh, they are wonderful.
Just wonderful.
They are wonderful.
Really, really beautiful.
But there is that period, that dangerous period, between... Which is ahead, right?
...about eight and eleven, when you will probably find that there are intense relationships with other little girls, and those relationships sometimes become problematical.
Now, I think parents are much more on to things nowadays, because the world of adults and the world of children are less hermetically sealed off from one another than they used to be.
more is known on either side.
And there isn't that attitude which really was quite prevalent, that it's good for the child to fight their own battles, even if it ends up with them getting mutilated along the way.
The voice—how do you ask the question about projecting voice?
It's a gift, I think.
I wonder when it comes.
I'm asking a question, I guess, about the creative process.
How do you get the voice?
Where does it really hear it?
At what point does it begin to express itself and presumably take on a life of its own?
You mean in the writing of any individual book?
Yeah, there's nothing in it.
Well, we hope by about page 10.
Really?
And if you don't get it, then you have to start over again.
That's a wonderful answer.
Do you hear it?
Yeah, sometimes you hear it right away, and sometimes you have to work your way into it and discard a member because they're in it wrong.
I started with a couple of other voices, but it's character, and they're just wrong.
So they could not be used.
I haven't read the whole show of Margaret Atwood.
I hope to.
I loved Handmaid's Tale.
This is the best novel that I've read of yours, may I say.
Well, I think you're right.
For whatever that small opinion is worth.
You never lose your sense of humor, which is important.
Well, it's very important in life, don't you think?
Indeed.
You can go on if you'd like on that.
You could say more on that if you'd like.
Well, I think there's a higher suicide risk among people without it.
I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
I really want to meet you.
Again, the book speaks for itself.
Here's a question.
Do you write for a particular audience?
No, I write for the reader.
The reader can be anybody.
The reader is like Plastic Man in the comics.
He could disguise himself as anything.
Do you remember that?
Did you read comics?
Indeed, yeah.
Plastic Man was one of my favorites.
Well, he could be a lamp or he could be a flashlight or contact.
He could be a chandelier.
You always knew because he was red and blue.
So the reader has that characteristic, namely the reader is literate.
The reader is up to things.
The reader is willing to go into the story and be there.
Those are the red and blue of the reader.
But apart from that, the reader can be anybody.
You never know when you may meet the reader.
You're not writing for Canadians, Americans, women, men?
All of those are quite free to read my book.
And you're translated in 20 languages, I guess.
This book has been amazingly well in England.
Why would that surprise you?
Well, because Canadians up until very recently in England were thought of as the most boring.
of all these ex-colonial countries.
Really?
The Canadians are on the bottom.
Below Australia?
Way below.
Australians had kangaroos.
I'm sorry to lie, you've never heard that.
Well, it's true.
It used to be that if you were a Canadian and you were in England, people would find out you were a Canadian and they'd say, oh, how interesting.
and they talk to the person on the other side.
So traditionally they don't read Canadian authors?
Well, they do now, because myself and Robertson Davies and others are now hitting the stands.
In fact, Canada has become a bit of a hot item.
This is all very recent.
There's a new young fellow, Neil... Neil Batumda.
I'm supposed to talk to him in about a week or so.
It's very nice.
I've had a chance to look at the book.
Yeah, I feel like it.
I'm told it's interesting.
There are two books.
One is a book of short stories.
This is a novel.
This novel has come out.
It's from Crown.
We're just setting the thing up today, so I can really keep up with the next interview.
He did well in England, but he's originally from the West Indies.
He claims to be related to Nipah.
He is.
He's one of my favorite stories.
In fact, I'm going to New York next week, too.
Well, and did you talk with Michael Ondaatje at all?
No.
Well, that would be interesting as well.
That really worked, wouldn't it?
Yeah.
But you see, we all know one.
It's a small country.
I've known Michael 13 was 18.
I'm a little bit older than he is, so I was 20-something.
19.
It was 19.
When I asked you that question about the audience, I liked being able to... Well, if the unknown member is reader, and I will read just about anything, or I will pick it up and give it a try, and it doesn't matter whether it's by a man, a woman, or what country, I will still read it.
Do you favor fiction, really?
Yeah, I favor fiction and pop science.
Really?
I can't touch science with that.
No, pop science is my right.
By pop science, I mean science without numbers, without the numbers in it.
I don't want to have to do the mathematics.
I just want to have them tell me what they've figured out.
Now, you read the Hawking book came out last year.
Oh, the Hawking book was just... So you must have grabbed that quote while you were almost finished.
Yeah, I grabbed that quote.
Because I was looking through about seven other books for a quote about time, and I had about three or four other quotes that I could have used, because they all talk about time.
Hawking's book is like a number of other books, except that it's very well written, and he's a very unusual figure, but it is a man who is presenting physics to a non-physics audience.
How can anyone explain that that book has been a bestseller for almost a year?
Well, Carl Sagan did very well as well.
Carl Sagan's books do well as well.
His book was more popular.
I think it's the nature of the man.
Someone operating under extreme disability.
And to be so brilliant.
To be able to figure out ways of overcoming this and getting the message out despite
What a message.
I think it appeals very much to the part of everybody that feels that they've got something pulling against them.
You know, that thing that you have to overcome.
Do you think that's what draws people to the book?
It's certainly one of the things.
I mean, the subject for me is... The subject is wonderful as well.
Well, it's intimidating.
But there have been a number of other books on the subject.
Now, this is by one of the primary thinkers in the field.
And he writes beautifully, I have to say, as a writer.
But his prose is wonderful.
So it's worth reading just for the prose as well.
It's not one of those science books that get you all completely bogged.
And that same McLean's piece, which I do learn through.
The person who wrote it mentioned that you see yourself as being something of a journalist in terms of, not for writing journalism, but for the powers of observation.
Well, I like to get the clothing right.
The clothing, the dates of the appearances of the awkward pink refrigerator.
And I think you need to do that, because if you get them wrong, you lose the reader.
And the reader will pick you up on that.
Oh, yeah.
I'm a stickler for that stuff, for any little detail.
I mean, Stephen Brenningham did a piece, a book on, this wasn't fiction, but he mentioned how John Sears, one of the last great lost popes, politicians from Massachusetts,
ran for mayor against Michael Tupacus.
Well, I mean, Michael Tupacus would get killed if he ever ran for mayor of Boston.
I mean, I'm Greek.
They were not like a Greek mayor.
The only thing Mike ever ran for was governor.
I mean, that's a major, major error.
How could he be wrong or something like that?
And I asked him, and I thought it was just a mistake.
He said, really?
And you know, I didn't write the piece.
I have to say my, I said, gee, gee, gee, they didn't check this thing out.
That's a
A small era, but it nevertheless for me is the kind of thing... Well, I changed some things on purpose.
Yeah, but that's... But you're writing fiction, too.
You have the right.
...visits Canada in my book two years earlier than she actually did, but nobody would ever know that unless I told her.
And I would never catch that.
The plays that Cordelia appears in at Stratford were never produced in the same music.
Well, that's... Tyrone Guthrie wasn't even the director when I said he was, but...
Only extreme nitpickers would ever figure that out.
I can't see, you know, bringing you to task for that, particularly writing a novel.
That's right.
And you have this license to do things.
I think the stocks and snowsuit details are more important.
If you take a Cadillac and put tail fins on it three years before they had tail fins, that's a mistake.
Because that's a cultural thing.
They're trying to pick up cultural... Well, one guy asked me why I had these marbles in his blue crown royal bag.
Now, it could quite easily be described as purple.
Purple and blue.
Yeah, it is.
So much the color of that.
Yeah, except it's a little bluer if you actually look at it.
I said that I needed blue.
I would rather describe it as blue for the scene.
Blue is a much more appropriate color because everything associated with that bridge is blue.
Do you labor over little details like this?
I don't know whether it's called laboring.
I think it's called... Pressing?
No, I think it's called making appropriate choices.
But does it interrupt the flow of the writing?
No, not particularly.
Is it the kind of thing you go back and work on?
I do a lot of revision, but that would have been an instinctual preference.
And then I might question why I made that choice, and there are reasons for it.
But I don't think the first draft of a novel is the same draft that you're doing the revision for.
I will write it, and then I will complete it.
Do you write in a word processor?
No, I write in both hands.
Really?
Sometimes it's pencil and sometimes it's that gliby kind of, not felt tape, but there's a kind of pen that glides very easily over the paper, some form of roll top.
So there will be a body of variant... There will be a body of extremely messy writing.
But with the word processor there will be no variant versions.
Well, of course, what happened, this time I transcribed onto a word processor rather than onto a typewriter.
And it made me much more paranoid than usual, because I kept thinking I was going to lose it.
So I kept having to print out all the versions.
And it generated a much larger stack of paper than usual.
Usually I would scribble out, and I would get those things, those strips that you type on, and then glue onto the page, stick onto the page.
So I would end up with a small stack of paper.
This looks huge.
But, I mean, do you write the same on a machine as you might work?
No, because I can't touch type.
That's why I write in longhand.
I never learn.
I have to look at the letters.
I'm always in a typewriter.
I couldn't write.
You couldn't write without it.
And the word process, and I loved it.
Well, I liked it because it made my typing look much better than it really is.
I was able to correct and mistake.
Oh, it looks like professional stuff.
Yeah, it looks like.
But it was more anxiety-inducing.
I'd get paranoid about my manuscripts anyway.
So I kept thinking, blackout, you know, everything will just vanish off my machine.
But do you ever find that your ideas are running ahead of your hand?
I write very quickly.
You don't?
I write very badly.
Can you read your own writing?
No.
Most of the time I can't.
But nobody else can.
So I can't just hand it to the title.
You realize what you're doing to scholars is the future.
I mean, we were going to try and... And it fills me with glee.
It does.
Well, it will keep them very busy.
Just think of all the work I'm creating, jobs of the future.
What do you think of a guy like... Who is it?
Who is it that just sold his working paper?
Saul Bellow.
Who actually put his papers up for auction, I think it was for one novel.
And they fetched a pretty nice sum.
I donate mine to the University of Toronto Library, but I got a tax write-up for it.
They've taken that away, I think, from mine.
In the state, but then I would have to sell them.
You would?
Oh, yeah.
I wouldn't sell personal letters.
But you'd sell them to scholars, or you'd sell them to collectors?
No, no, scholars.
You see, he put his up at an auction, and I don't know who got them, but...
You know, some guy who prizes, you know, association stuff.
Well, that would come under the heading of fetishism for me.
I think in his case it was a statement, and Adele was great for statements, too, because I don't think he likes this whole industry of people who commit their lives to— Well, then why sell them at all, unless you wanted to know it?
You know, he could have given them to an institution, like the University of Chicago or something like that.
Well, I used to have feelings that way myself.
But then I heard George Stony say something that made quite a lot of sense, which was, critics are the postmen to the future.
That's a wonderful quote.
You may, you new writers, you may rail against us, et cetera, but it is we who will eventually deliver your work to another generation.
Maybe, maybe not.
I mean, if it were up to the critics, Melville would be... But it was also critics that resurrected it.
Resurrected in the 1920s.
Yes.
Now, by critics, I don't necessarily mean critics in the now.
No, no critics in that.
Criticism in general will come along and say to another generation, this is wonderful.
I think of Norfolk Pride.
resurrecting, like, major prophecies, which nobody's ever thought about in California.
I'm going to wrap it up.
Oh, really?